# \#1 
*"Inaction begets inaction. <br/>
Cowering away from a hard choice is an act of compounding indecisiveness with stagnation.
An act that smothers progress."* <br/>
This axiom every member of the faith knew.

Eliad stood hunching on a windowsill inside the church, staring out into the plains of Dawngrove.
His gaze was locked onto a grazing grusk, but his mind wandered places
\- exploring consequences that may arise if he was to go down this path.
He felt a negative surge of emotions weigh his chest down.
The faith was all he had,
its people made him the man he was.
Leaving them behind meant letting go of his selfdom,
abandoning a life of certainity and
taking a road that leads to places he'd never been.

Yet every cell of his being cried for change.
Assisting in rituals, keeping records of scriptures and religious texts,
collecting donations for the church - day in, day out.
He was deeply dissatisfied with his role in the faith, and in life.
He sought to climb out of this rut.

Failing to choose between guaranteed stagnation and a possibility of seclusion
\- this was the crux of his turmoil.
But being irresolute was not an option, life demanded decisions of him.
He silently mouthed the axiom to himself,
drew in a deep breath and stood upright, hands still on the windowsill.

He had made a choice, not knowing if it was for the better.
In the next gathering, he would announce his departure from the church.
He would venture out of Dawngrove and experience all that the universe had to offer.
